[Music]
madagascar was one of the last places on
earth to be reached by human beings
they didn't get here until around 2000
years ago and then of course there were
just
a few hundred fifty years ago they were
around
six million today
[Music]
was it human beings who exterminated
much of the island's animals
the elephant bird as well as the giant
lemurs did they perhaps hunt them for
food
one of the ways that you can tell
whether or not human beings
hunted an animal is to look at the
animal's bones
this is the bone of an extinct lemur
that dates from about 2000 years ago
when human beings first came to this
island
and when you look at it you can see at
the top there
cut marks so we know
that this lemur was killed or at least
eaten
by human beings who cut the flesh away
from the bone
with some kind of knife but the
interesting thing is
although we also find elephant bird
bones
hardly a one of the elephant bird birds
have cut marks so we can't really blame
the disappearance of the elephant bird
on hunters the country's capital
is canaan river or tana as the locals
call it
and the place to go if you want to find
out about the island's natural history
is obviously its museum
it had stuffed examples of some of the
animals i already knew something about
[Music]
but i also found a mounted skeleton of
the huge bird that interests me so much
one of the very few that exists
so how tall was the elephant bird
not an easy question to answer because
very few skeletons are totally complete
and so many of the mountain specimens
have been put together
with a number of bones from different
specimens
and if you get over enthusiastic maybe
it's quite possible
that you stick in one or two extra neck
bones so we can't be sure
about the length of the neck nor
can we be sure about the posture really
this one
looks to me rather front heavy and it
could well be that
in life the animal was more upright
in which case it stood very tall indeed
what
10 feet 12 feet that sort of size in
order to be able to reach the leaves
of trees on which it browsed but
a more safe characteristic is weight
and you can be fairly sure the estimate
of that and it reckoned that the
elephant bird weighed around
half a ton
[Music]
the extinct mowers of new zealand might
perhaps have been taller
but this was certainly the heaviest bird
that ever existed
and of course it was flightless like an
ostrich
here in the basement of the
archaeological department at oxford
university
there's a carbon dating apparatus which
can accurately find the age of ancient
objects
natural and man-made
it's a complicated process involving all
kinds of very sophisticated techniques
but i've been told that thomas hyam who
took the sample from my egg
has got a result
you took a tiny bit of this i know a
very small amount
and tell me come on what's the answer
well our date suggests that this egg is
one thousand
three hundred years old no yes yep
say it again one thousand three hundred
years old and that puts it at what date
about 700 600 to 700 a.d and
did that surprise you um i thought it
was quite
a lot younger than i thought it would be
actually um and i say that
i did and i say that because i checked
back on all of the other
eggshell dates that we've dated from
madagascar from the species
and the youngest date that we've ever
got is is about
900 a.d here is 600 ad 800 a.d
and your dates are these ones that just
sit in here and these are the youngest
so
so it's it's quite a it's quite a recent
one in uh in terms of
it is indeed so this in fact
was one of the last of the elephant
rights i think within
within 100 to 200 years perhaps perhaps
yes
huh the chick that came out of this was
one of the last
absolutely amazing when do you think it
disappeared i think somewhere
before the before 1000 a.d it was
extinct
largely extinct yeah
so there we have it my egg is 1300 years
old
and one of the most recent eggs of its
kind that the university has dated
i'm on my way to the west of the island
where a few small patches of that
ancient forest still remain
these strange beautiful trees bear babs
are fire resistant and too big to cut
down
so in many places they are the only
remnants left of the original forest
that once covered this land it would
have been difficult for a creature the
size of an elephant bird
to live without vegetation of some kind
and today
even the smallest of animals are
struggling to survive here
[Music]
one of those that have managed to do so
is the tiniest of all known lemurs
it's called madame bert's mouse lemur
and it was only discovered 10 years ago
melanie damhan is part of a team of
scientists who are studying the animal
trying to work out how to protect it oh
tiny tiny tiny tiny just only 30 gram
body weight
yeah smallest primary smallest primer in
the world
big eyes smaller big eyes yeah
and a wet nose yeah yeah
melanie and her colleagues catch these
lemurs and tag them
to build up a picture of their behavior
essential knowledge if they're to be
properly protected
and how long will he have been in there
now a few hours
that'll so we collect him at night and
then he stays in camp and sleeps in
there and then we release him
and you caught him how many times maybe
around 20.
so he's three years he's accustomed to
it and
do they travel very far they travel very
far they have like
three hectare home range so that's quite
a bit for an animal like that
certainly yeah they might even run like
five kilometers a night
really yeah an animal like that i think
that's amazing amazing
yeah okay let's see him go
it's coming come on
come on one
that's it that's it
the work melanie and her team are doing
is vital for the survival of this little
lemur
it's also revealing just why it is that
this tiny creature lives here and
nowhere else
this particular liana belongs to a
species that only grows
in this patch of forest and on it
and on no other kind of liana lives this
little insect it's a bug which feeds
by sticking its mouth parts into the
lyanna and
sucking out the sap he then digests what
it wants
and excretes the rest as honeydew or
sort of
sugary liquid and it's that
honeydew that sugar that madame bert's
nema needs in its diet
so madame bert's lima is only found
in this particular face of the forest
because of this insect
and this diana which just shows how
complicated
ecological connections can be and how
much you have to know
about an animal if you're really going
to conserve it
so why did the elephant bird disappear
it could have been climate change which
turned much of its land
into desert it could have been that
people destroyed the forest where it
browsed
i doubt if it was hunted to extinction
anyone who's seen
an ostrich in a zoo knows it's got a
kick that can open a man's stomach
and an enraged elephant birds many of
the times the size of an ostrich must
have been a truly formidable opponent
i suspect it was these it's egg
they may not have been able to tackle an
adult bird
but they could take its eggs which were
a huge source
of nourishment and so i think it's
probably these
are the reason why the elephant bird is
no longer here
even if the bird itself was held in awe
or maybe fear
by the people here they might not have
had too much trouble
in robbing it of its huge nutritious
eggs
so although there were several factors
threatening the bird's survival
it could have been people eating the
eggs who dealt the species its final
blow
[Music]
today we've come to realize that if you
want to preserve a species
you have to preserve the whole community
of plants and animals
some people here are trying to tackle
that problem
[Music]
ryla dolce manages one such group in
entry country
i asked him how much forest remained
as we speak it's very fragmented
unfortunately in this particular area
we have almost no continuous forest
anymore this is a fragment of about
800 hectares one
crucial issue for conservation is to
link these fragments
with each other so that there could be
genetic exchange between
plant and animal species that live there
so if they remained as fragments really
the inhabitants of the animal inhabits
are doomed
yeah that's that's pretty much the case
and there is studies
concerning the injury for instance
saying that
a minimum size for
a forest in which the injury can survive
is about a thousand two thousand two
hundred hectares
so you have to link them up exactly and
how you're doing it
well one thing that we try to do is
actually re-establish the rainforest in
between these fragments
by planting trees that
we actually raise in this nursery here
from the seeds that we collect in the
forest
and and how's it going how many are you
replanting
well we now have replanted an area of
about a thousand hectares you have
ideally have at least 60 species per
hectare that you plant
so this is this is kind of a hard work
how many
trees do you think you have planted if
you take
a thousand trees per hectare as a rule
of a thumb
then uh this makes slightly more than a
million trees now
a million trees in how many years that's
in
three years of planting fantastic a
million in three years
that is a lot of trees
[Music]
you